WIP: Coin Selection Page (#90)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/payments/coin-selection.md

    - Exposes: Jane to Joe
- **Option 2:** 
    - 0.5 BTC from Joe
    - 0.5 BTC from Ed
    - Total Output: 1 BTC (0.4 BTC change)
    - Exposes: Ed to Joe
- **Option 3:**
    - 0.5 BTC from Joe
    - 1 BTC from Ed
    - Total Output: 1.5 BTC (0.9 BTC change)
    - Exposes: Ed to Joe

### The Challenge for Designers 

In each of these scenarios, we are exposing the data of each previous UTXO owner. So the first question we are faced with is, how many people should we expose to Joe? However, we are also faced with the issue of exposing how much BTC we own to Joe. In option 1, Patrick knows I own *at least* 1.345 BTC. In option 2, 1 BTC. And in Option 3, 1.5 BTC. This is another consideration to take into account when selecting coins.

The questions designers and developers are faced with are: how much privacy to we want to inherently bake into our wallets payments? Do we want users to have manual selection over which coins they use to fund a transaction? Should this be an automated process? Finally, and perhaps most importantly, how do we translate this privacy risk to the user through the UI?

### Solutions - Optimising for Privacy

#### Automatic Coin Selection

> The ideal privacy oriented automated solution would be for bitcoin wallets to automatically select (a cluster of) coins to send from the payee's recognised address (e.g Joe), thereby minimising privacy exposure as a default standard. However, this relies upon there being an existing cluster recognised by the payee's address, as well as this cluster containing enough bitcoin to fund the outgoing transaction. If there is an additional sum of bitcoin required for the transaction input, or perhaps no recognised cluster of coins at all, the wallet could then default to one of the three following options (commonly used by bitcoin wallets today) for coin selection:[^3]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ideal privacy-oriented, automated solution to should select (a cluster of) coins to send from the payee's recognised address (e.g Joe), thereby minimising privacy exposure as a default standard. However, this relies upon there being an existing cluster recognised by the payee's address, as well as this cluster containing enough bitcoin to fund the outgoing transaction. If there is an additional sum of bitcoin required for the transaction input, or perhaps no recognised cluster of coins at all, the wallet could then default to one of the three following options (commonly used by bitcoin wallets today) for coin selection:[^3]
```

> The ideal privacy oriented automated solution would be for bitcoin wallets to automatically select (a cluster of) coins to send from the payee's recognised address (e.g Joe), thereby minimising privacy exposure as a default standard. However, this relies upon there being an existing cluster recognised by the payee's address, as well as this cluster containing enough bitcoin to fund the outgoing transaction. If there is an additional sum of bitcoin required for the transaction input, or perhaps no recognised cluster of coins at all, the wallet could then default to one of the three following options (commonly used by bitcoin wallets today) for coin selection:[^3]

Reviewer: Try breaking this paragraph into concise sentences if you can.

---
layout: guide
title: Coin Selection
nav_order: 1
parent: Payments
permalink: /guide/payments/coin-selection/
---

{% include picture.html

  image = "/assets/images/payments/coin-selection-header.png"

  retina = "/assets/images/payments/coin-selection-header@2x.png"

  mobile = "/assets/images/payments/coin-selection-header.png"

  mobileRetina = "/assets/images/payments/coin-selection-header@2x.png"

  alt-text = ""

  width = 1600

  height = 900

  layout = "full-width"

%}

# Coin Selection

## Intro

Coin selection is the process of choosing which of your Bitcoins to spend when creating and approving a spending transaction. To understand coin selection a little better, we must first grasp the concept of Unspent Transaction Outputs (UTXOs).

> A UTXO is the amount of digital currency remaining after a bitcoin transaction has been executed - essentially, the unspent change left after someone completes a transaction, similar to the change someone receives after conducting a cash transaction at the store. They are processed continuously and are responsible for beginning and ending each bitcoin transaction. They might sound complicated, but they really are quite simple. 

Reviewer: @johnsBeharry is there any other part of the payment guide that explains UTXOs? I feel like this can be referenced to somewhere instead of repeated?

How does this relate to coin selection, you might ask? Because UTXOs allow for transactions to be conducted using miltiple fractions of bitcoin that do not all come from a single previous transaction. Instead, multiple fractions of bitcoin are retrieved by the algorithm to fulfill a spending request. For example, a purchase worth 1 bitcoin may retrieve 0.6 BTC from one byte and 0.4 BTC from another. Change from each of these fractions is then sent to the UTXO database to be spent at a later date.

> For example, my wallet balance is 1 bitcoin (BTC). If I have recently mined a block, this could be a fresh whole bitcoin. However, it is most likely going to be an accumulation of UTXOs (change) from previous bitcoin transactions. So, a balance of 1 BTC is more likely to comprimise of:

Author: Thank you @pavlenex for all these comments. This is just a draft version for now but needs review, so thanks for the feedback. As for the UTXO reference, I agree, it would save a lot of time not having to explain this again and repeat information

> For example, my wallet balance is 1 bitcoin (BTC). If I have recently mined a block, this could be a fresh whole bitcoin. However, it is most likely going to be an accumulation of UTXOs (change) from previous bitcoin transactions. So, a balance of 1 BTC is more likely to comprimise of:

Reviewer: Ah okay @barefoot-88, I wasn't aware this is still a draft, please let me know once it's ready for a review, happy to take a better look when it's ready.

> For example, my wallet balance is 1 bitcoin (BTC). If I have recently mined a block, this could be a fresh whole bitcoin. However, it is most likely going to be an accumulation of UTXOs (change) from previous bitcoin transactions. So, a balance of 1 BTC is more likely to comprimise of:

Author: Will do, thanks!

Ideally, if I were to send a payment of 0.25 BTC to Patrick, I would have a cluster of UTXOs that have previously come from one of his own incoming transactions. Therefore, I do not reveal any additional information about the UTXOs I control to the payee. However, unfortunately I do not have a cluster only known to Patrick with enough UTXOs totalling the amount I wish to send. Therefore, I am going to have to select coins (UTXOs) to fund my transaction that have not originated from one of Patrick's addresses, thereby partially exposing coins from that cluster, as well as that of another (Ed, Jelena, or Bill). Ideally, we want to expose the least amount of information possible to Patrick. 

![](https://i.imgur.com/LtTUq5u.png)

### The Transaction

To complete Patrick's payment request of 0.25 BTC, I am going to have to select which UTXOs to fund the transaction with. 

Because the payment is to Patrick, it makes sense to use the 0.1 BTC (UTXO) from his address, as this does not comprimise anyone else's privacy. However, I still have 0.15 BTC remaining in order to fund the transaction. 

This transaction could be funded in multiple different ways:

> - **Option 1:**

Reviewer: I am unsure if it's just me, but imo this is all better explained visually. There are just way too many numbers and names for a person to understand what's going on here.

   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/coins.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/coins@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Screen showing a list of transactions with details about the payment"
   caption = "The sender manually selects which coins they wish to use as their payment inputs."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/review.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/review@2x.png"
   alt-text = "The sender reviews the final details of the payment before signing their transaction."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/sent.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/sent@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Screen showing a list of transactions with details about the payment"
   caption = "After signing the transaction, the sender receives a notification to show the payment has been sent."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

</div>

> #### Pros
> 
> - Gives user full control over coin selection. They can choose to optimize for privacy, cost, or speed, and delegate risk accordingly.
> - Good labeling of coins allows users to prioritize recognized clusters, thereby minimizing the exposure of historical transaction data, balances, and addresses associated with certain coins.
> - Has potential to reduce dust attacks (avoiding choosing minute or unknown UTXOs for payment inputs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% include fact/pros.html %}
- Gives user full control over coin selection. They can choose to optimize for privacy, cost, or speed, and delegate risk accordingly.
- Good labeling of coins allows users to prioritize recognized clusters, thereby minimizing the exposure of historical transaction data, balances, and addresses associated with certain coins.
- Has potential to reduce dust attacks (avoiding choosing minute or unknown UTXOs for payment inputs)
{% include fact/close.html %}
```

> #### Cons
> 
> - Can be a lengthy, often confusing process (particularly for inexperienced users)
> - Inexperienced bitcoiners may end up making mistakes that result in higher fees, slower transactions, or a loss of privacy
> - Can lead to dust attacks if not careful selecting sizes of UTXO inputs
> - Bad labeling of contacts and clusters can lead to sensitive information being exposed

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{% include fact/cons.html %}
- Can be a lengthy, often confusing process (particularly for inexperienced users)
- Inexperienced users may end up making mistakes that result in higher fees, slower transactions, or a loss of privacy
- Can lead to dust attacks if not careful selecting sizes of UTXO inputs
- Bad labeling of contacts and clusters can lead to sensitive information being exposed
{% include fact/close.html %}
```

### Best practise

#### When to use

- Wallets oriented towards advanced, privacy focused bitcoiners
- When wanting to optimise for privacy (with help of labels)
- When wanting to give users full control of selecting transaction inputs

#### When not to use

- Introductory level bitcoin wallets
- If privacy is of no concern

#### Products that use this scheme

> {% include fact/productss.html %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% include fact/products.html %}
```

- Freezing certain coins reduces the size of a wallet's UTXO pool, and may hinder an automatic algorithm’s ability to optimise for speed, cost, or privacy.
{% include fact/close.html %}

### Best practice

#### When to use
- New users or introductory level wallets
- Wallets specifically optimizing for either cost, speed, or privacy
- Wallets  prioritizing privacy in automatic coin selection

#### When not to use
- When privacy is a top priority to users
- When wanting to provide a more custom experience for Bitcoin transactions

#### Products that use this scheme
- Bread Wallet + Electrum (FIFO)
- Mycelium (Pruned FIFO)
- BitcoinJ and Bitcoin Wallet for Android (High Priority First)
- Electrum *Private Mode* (Target Sized Change)
- Bitcoin Core (Branch and Bound)
- Hexa (Blackjack, with Accumulative Fallback)

## Manual coin selection (a.k.a coin control)

This strategy of manual coin selection gives users full control over exactly which coins or clusters they use to fund a transaction input for an outgoing payment request.

> Manual coin control is often an “opt-in” strategy, agreed to by users as they enter “Private Mode” or select “Manual Coin Selection” when creating an outgoing payment request. However, it is also possible for bitcoin wallets to use manual coin control as their default coin selection strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manual coin control is often an “opt-in” strategy, agreed to by users as they enter “Private Mode” or select “Manual Coin Selection” when creating an outgoing payment request. However, it is also possible for Bitcoin wallets to use manual coin control as their default coin selection strategy.
```

> This strategy gives you the ability to choose what you wish to optimise for in bitcoin transactions (cost, speed, or privacy). However, it’s worth noting that manual coin control, whilst beneficial to many, could also lead to expensive, slow, or revealing transactions if used incorrectly. Manual coin selection is an advanced feature and should be used (and designed) with caution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This strategy gives users the ability to choose what they wish to optimize for in Bitcoin transactions (cost, speed, or privacy). However, it’s worth noting that manual coin control, whilst beneficial to many, could also lead to expensive, slow, or revealing transactions if misused. Manual coin selection is an advanced feature and should be used (and designed) with caution.
```

   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/coins.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/coins@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Screen showing a list of transactions with details about the payment"
   caption = "The sender manually selects which coins they wish to use as their payment inputs."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/review.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/review@2x.png"
   alt-text = "The sender reviews the final details of the payment before signing their transaction."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/sent.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/sent@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Screen showing a list of transactions with details about the payment"
   caption = "After signing the transaction, the sender receives a notification to show the payment has been sent."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

</div>

#### Pros

> - Gives user full control over coin selection. They can choose to optimise for privacy, cost, or speed, and delegate risk accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Gives user full control over coin selection. They can choose to optimize for privacy, cost, or speed, and delegate risk accordingly.
```

---
layout: guide
title: Coin Selection
nav_order: 1
parent: Payments
permalink: /guide/payments/coin-selection/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
---

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/header.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/header@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/header-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/header-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Coin Selection"
   width = 1600
   height = 800
   layout = "full-width"
%}

# Coin selection

Coin selection is the process of choosing which [UTXOs](https://hackmd.io/glossary#utxo) (or “coins”) to fund a bitcoin transaction with (inputs[^1]) when making an on-chain payment. Since your wallet contains multiple coins to arrive at a balance, these are retrieved by an algorithm to fulfill the payment amount for outgoing transactions.

Coin selection, whether an automated or manual process, is important when understanding how we can successfully optimise our bitcoin payments for either cost, speed, or privacy.

> 
> There are two categories of coin selection strategies that are used in bitcoin applications:
> 
> 1. **Automatic Coin Selection** (wallet is delegated to control coin selection on behalf on user)
> 2. **Manual Coin Selection** (user controls coin selection)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/funding-tx.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/funding-tx@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/funding-tx-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/funding-tx-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Funding TX"
   width = 800
   height = 400

> %}

Reviewer: Nice image but it's too tiny, here's how it looks on my desktop.

![Screenshot 2021-05-27 at 18 20 12](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/36959754/119862018-57e9ea00-bf18-11eb-9c76-b8181dd0c243.png)

> ### Hard contraints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Contraints
```

> Before exploring some popular coin selection strategies, it’s worth noting the following when making a bitcoin payment in relation to UTXOs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few constraints that you should have in mind when considering the coin-selection strategy for your product.
```

> Firtstly; the transaction must have sufficient funding. For example, in order to send X, the transaction inputs must at least equate to X. Second; as blockspace is limited, miners prioritise transactions by *fee per byte* to maximise revenue. Transactions must be accompanied by the minimum relay fee for confirmation (therefore inputs must equal X + fee). Third; transaction outputs must have a value of 500 sats or more. Anything less than this value is considered  a "dust" output, and these transactions are often not relayed and confirmed by most nodes and miners in the network. Finally; it is essential for wallet owners to label their incoming and outgoing (change) coins. Labels provide context to a wallet’s transaction history and coin provenance, making it easier to successfully employ coin control for privacy optimisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the transaction must have sufficient funding. For example, to send X, the transaction inputs must at least equate to X. 

Second, as blockspace is limited, miners prioritize transactions by *fee per byte* to maximize revenue. The minimum relay fee must accompany transactions for confirmation (therefore, inputs must equal X + fee). 

Third, transaction outputs must have a value of 500 sats or more. Anything less than this value is considered a "dust" output, and these transactions are often not relayed and confirmed by most nodes and miners in the network. 

Finally, wallet owners need to label their incoming and outgoing (change) coins. Labels provide context to a wallet’s transaction history and coin provenance, making it easier to successfully employ coin control for privacy optimization.
```

> ### Optimisations

Reviewer: We use US across the guide. For standardizing.
```suggestion
### Optimizations
```

> Coin selection will always lead to certain effects and outcomes which can either optimise or hinder our bitcoin payments. Below is a breakdown of the three most common effects of coin control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether an automated or manual process, coin selection is important when understanding how to optimize our Bitcoin payments for either cost, speed, or privacy. Below is a breakdown of the three most common effects of coin control.
```

#### Cost

> Miners select transactions on the basis of their fee, measured by the fee rate of satoshis per byte. Therefore, it is cost effective for users to minimize transaction size by minimising the number of inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Miners select transactions based on their fee, measured by the fee rate of satoshis per byte. Therefore, it is cost-effective for users to minimize transaction size by minimizing the number of inputs.
```

#### Speed

> Higher fees will increase the likelihood of your transaction being prioritised by miners and included in the next block, thereby increasing the speed of your transaction. This can be optimised by either increasing the fee rate, or by selecting a higher number of transaction inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Higher fees will increase the likelihood of your transaction being prioritized by miners and included in the next block, thereby increasing the speed of your transaction. This can be optimized by either increasing the fee rate or selecting a higher number of transaction inputs.
```

#### Privacy

> Because each UTXO can be traced backwards on a public ledger, we can unearth the digital footprints of bitcoin payments. Privacy is often lost due to the exposure of unknown coins, addresses, balances, and economic activity to unrecognised trading partners. Privacy can be optimised by selecting transaction inputs from an anonymity set (CoinJoins or mixers) or a recognised label or cluster, or by reducing the size of change outputs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because each UTXO can be traced backward on a public ledger, we can unearth the digital footprints of Bitcoin payments. Privacy is often lost due to the exposure of unknown coins, addresses, balances, and economic activity to unrecognized trading partners. Privacy can be optimized by selecting transaction inputs from an anonymity set (CoinJoins or mixers) or a recognized label or cluster or reducing the size of change outputs. 
```

## Automatic coin selection

> This strategy has arguably become the most popular form of coin selection used in bitcoin wallets and transactions. Wallet applications are delegated control, selecting coins on behalf of users in order to fulfil a payment request. As mentioned above, “fractions (of bitcoins) are retrieved by an algorithm to fulfill the payment amount”. This algorithm varies from wallet to wallet, and is dependent upon the desired outcome of optimisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This strategy has arguably become the most popular form of coin selection used in Bitcoin wallets and applications. The application selects the coins on behalf of users to fulfill a payment request. As mentioned above, “fractions (of bitcoins) are retrieved by an algorithm to fulfill the payment amount”. This algorithm varies from wallet to wallet, and is dependent upon the desired outcome of optimisation.
```

> Automatic selection strategies can provide a near frictionless user experience, and is therefore suitable for most introductory level bitcoin wallets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automatic selection strategies can provide a near frictionless user experience and are suitable for most introductory level Bitcoin wallets.
```

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/automatic-coin-selection.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/automatic-coin-selection@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/automatic-coin-selection-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/automatic-coin-selection-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Automatic Coin Selection"
   width = 800
   height = 400
%}

### How it works

> A user chooses to send a payment to one of their contacts. They enter the amount of bitcoin they wish to send, select their transaction fee rate, and approve the outgoing payment request. During this process, their wallet selects which coins to use to fund the transaction’s inputs, making sure it can fulfill the payment request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user chooses to send a payment to one of their contacts. They enter the amount of bitcoin they wish to send, select their transaction fee rate, and approve the outgoing payment request. During this process, their wallet **automatically** selects which coins to use to fund the transaction’s inputs, making sure it can fulfill the payment request.
```

   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/send-details@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Screen showing a list of transactions with details about the payment"
   caption = "Sender enters the amount, a destination address, and a label."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/auto.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/auto@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Screen showing a list of transactions with details about the payment"
   caption = "The sender reviews the final details of the payment before signing the transaction and decides to go ahead with automatic coin selection."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/sent.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/sent@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Screen showing a list of transactions with details about the payment"
   caption = "After signing the transaction, the sender receives a notification to show the payment has been sent."
   width = 250
   height = 541
   layout = "shadow"
%}

</div>

> A few *popular algorithms* currently implemented by bitcoin wallets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few *popular algorithms* currently implemented by Bitcoin wallets:
```

> - **First In First Out (FIFO) / Last In, First Out (LIFO)**<br/>
>   The default strategy spends the oldest/youngest coins first.
> - **Pruned FIFO**<br/>
>   Similiar to FIFO, but smallest coins filtered out in post-selection step.
> - **High Priority First**<br/>
>   Coins selected by priority (calculated by value x age). Up until February 2016, a portion of each block (50kB) was reserved for high-priority transactions by default. This algorithm therefore optimised for transaction speed.
> - **Minimize Fees (Optimize Size)**<br/>
>   Spending the lowest number of coins to reduce the byte size of the transaction, resulting in a lower fee.
> - **Minimize Future Fees (Merge Coins)**<br/>
>   Spending the maximum number of inputs to merge coins as a single change output for future use. This strategy can optimise for speed as the transaction size (and therefore cost) is increased. However, merging coins can also lead to a loss of privacy as coins, their addresses, balances, and historical transaction data are intertwined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% include dl/open.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="red" %}

**First In First Out (FIFO) / Last In, First Out (LIFO)**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="red" %}

The default strategy spends the oldest/youngest coins first.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="orange" %}

**Pruned FIFO**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="orange" %}

Similar to FIFO, but the smallest coins filtered out in the post-selection step.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="yellow" %}

**High Priority First**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="yellow" %}

Coins selected by priority (calculated by value x age). Up until February 2016, a portion of each block (50kB) was reserved for high-priority transactions by default. This algorithm, therefore, optimized for transaction speed.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="green" %}

**Minimize Fees (Optimize Size)**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="green" %}

Spending the lowest number of coins to reduce the byte size of the transaction, resulting in a lower fee.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html %}

**Minimize Future Fees (Merge Coins)**

{% include dl/item-middle.html %}

Spending the maximum number of inputs to merge coins as a single change output for future use. This strategy can optimize for speed as the transaction size (and therefore cost) is increased. However, merging coins can also lead to a loss of privacy as coins, their addresses, balances, and historical transaction data are intertwined.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/close.html %}
```

A few more, *optimising for privacy*

> - **Target Sized Change**<br/>
>   Wallet aims to minimize the value difference of target input and change output.
> - **Branch & Bound (BnB)/Exact Change**<br/>
>   Wallet finds an input set that is equal in value to the target, avoiding change outputs. If the wallet cannot find an exact match, it refers back to a “knapsack” solver which selects inputs that minimise the change output to within 0.01 BTC.
> - **Blackjack**<br/>
>   Accumulates inputs until the target value (+fees) is matched, does not accumulate inputs that go over the target value (within a threshold).
> - **Accumulative**<br/>
>   Accumulates inputs until the target value (+fees) is reached, skipping detrimental inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-{% include dl/open.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="red" %}

**Target Sized Change**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="red" %}

Wallet aims to minimize the value difference of target input and change output.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="orange" %}

**Branch & Bound (BnB)/Exact Change**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="orange" %}

Wallet finds an input set that is equal in value to the target, avoiding change outputs. If the wallet cannot find an exact match, it refers back to a “knapsack” solver which selects inputs that minimize the change output to within 0.01 BTC.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="yellow" %}

**Blackjack**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="yellow" %}

Accumulates inputs until the target value (+fees) is matched, does not accumulate inputs that go over the target value (within a threshold).    

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html color="green" %}

**Accumulative**

{% include dl/item-middle.html color="green" %}

Accumulates inputs until the target value (+fees) is reached, skipping detrimental inputs.
{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/item-open.html %}

*Freezing Coins**

{% include dl/item-middle.html %}

Freezes certain coins or clusters from their wallet’s UTXO pool to either prioritize or avoid using when funding outgoing payment requests. This technique aids automatic selection strategies to become more private but also relies on the practice of successfully labeling coins.

{% include dl/item-close.html %}

{% include dl/close.html %}
```

> 
> *Additional ways to otpimise automatic coin selection for privacy:*
> 
> - **Freezing Coins**<br/>
> Some wallets allow users to "freeze" certain coins or clusters from their wallet’s UTXO pool to either prioritise or avoid using when funding outgoing payment requests. This technique aids automatic selection strategies to become more private, but also relies on the practise of successfully labelling coins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/freezing.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/freezing@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/freezing-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/glossary/coin-selection/freezing-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Freezing"
   width = 800
   height = 400
%}

{% include fact/pros.html %}

> - Low friction: easy for end user, doesn’t have to play around with manual coin selection (often an overwhelming process).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Low friction: easy for end-user, doesn’t have to play around with manual coin selection
```

> - Wallets can choose to optimise for cost, speed, or privacy (byte size of transaction, fee, change outputs) depending upon their targeted user group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wallets can choose to optimize for cost, speed, or privacy (byte size of transaction, fee, change outputs) depending upon their targeted user group.
```

> - Minimising change outputs decreases balance exposure (e.g BnB or Target Sized Change) and chance of tracing future transactions from that address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Minimizing change outputs and decreases balance exposure and the chance of tracing future transactions from that address.
```

> - Freezing coins gives some form of privacy control whilst allowing wallets to further optimise for cost, speed, or privacy

Reviewer: Removing as it's focused on a single strategy rather 
```suggestion
```

{% include fact/close.html %}

{% include fact/cons.html %}

> - These strategies do not optimise for all 3 features (speed, cost, privacy), and more often than not privacy is the first to be sacrificed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Doesn't optimize for all three features (speed, cost, privacy)
```

> - Automatic selection strategies may select UTXOs associated with targered dusting attacks, resulting in privacy loss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatic selection strategies may select UTXOs associated with targeted dusting attacks, resulting in privacy loss
```

> - UTXOs selected from unrecognised clusters can expose private data of wallet addresses, balances, and contact payment information (UTXO derivation paths and data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- UTXOs selected from unrecognized clusters can expose private data of wallet addresses, balances, and contact payment information (UTXO derivation paths and data).
```

- Reducing the inputs (byte size) of bitcoin transactions doesn’t usually optimise for minimal change outputs, exposing larger amounts of sensitive wallet data.

> - Standard network (relay) fees are usually so high that sacrificing privacy comes at little gain.
> - With the introduction of the Lightning Network, these solutions provide little gain for a decrease in privacy protection.
> - Privacy oriented strategies can require strenuous computational power (BnB).
> - Smaller/no change outputs are not guaranteed and is often dependent upon wallets having a large variation of UTXOs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Freezing certain coins reduces the size of a wallet's UTXO pool, and may hinder an automatic algorithm’s ability to optimise for speed, cost, or privacy.
{% include fact/close.html %}

### Best practice

#### When to use
- New users or introductory level wallets

> - Wallets that wish to specifically optimise for either cost, speed, or privacy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wallets specifically optimizing for either cost, speed, or privacy
```

> - Wallets that wish to prioritise privacy in automatic coin selection (BnB or Target Size Change)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wallets  prioritizing privacy in automatic coin selection
```

> - Freezing coins allows for further privacy optimisation and maleability, without overwhelming users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### When not to use
- When privacy is a top priority to users

> - When wanting to provide a more custom experience for bitcoin transactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When wanting to provide a more custom experience for Bitcoin transactions
```
